Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on ranking or alphabet test.
You don't need a fancy degree
for understanding this concept.
Just a few minutes and an open
mind, we are about to make the
complicated, ridiculously clear on
this concept with this tutorial.
So pull up a chair and let's get started.
Concept explanation.
All right, so what exactly
are we diving into today, huh?
Well, ranking problems, my friend,
are all about figuring out where
folks stand in a line or maybe in a
column based on the hints and clues
given about their relative positions.
It's just like for finding out if
your neighbor JI is ahead or behind
you in the endless queue for the
latest government service, you know?
These problems typically involve
calculating the total number of people
present, finding someone's particular
spot from the opposite end of the
line, or perhaps even identifying the
exact number of people who are chilling
casually between two individuals.
On the flip side, alphabet test problems
are our delightful little tasks directly
related to the good old English alphabet.
This includes challenges, like finding
letters at specific positions, identifying
hidden patterns in a letter series.
Sometimes it feels like
cracking a secret, doesn't it?
Or even trying to form meaningful
words from a seemingly random
jumble of given letters.
Occasionally they might ask you to count
letters or words that satisfy certain
unique conditions within a given sequence.
Both of these fantastic topics, my
friend, are absolutely crucial because
they meticulously test your inherent
ability to truly understand and interpret
positional information, master logical
sequences, and of course, conquer
alphabetical order with confidence.
Real world relevance.
Now, you might be thinking
to yourself array.
Sir, why on earth do I actually need
to know all this for my daily life
or my future career array, my friend?
It's quite simple.
Really, these topics, believe it or not.
Aren't just confined to the pages
of your exam books you see, they
fundamentally enhance your brain's
amazing ability to properly organize
and sequence information, which is a
critical skill for almost everything.
Imagine yourself managing long
winding cues at a busy bank counter,
or perhaps prioritizing various
important tasks at your office, or
effectively arranging massive amounts
of data in a systematic manner.
This is precisely where these finely honed
skills truly shine in the banking sector.
For instance, a solid understanding of
ranking principles helps tremendously
in the orderly processing of countless
applications or in arranging crucial
customer data based on very specific
criteria, all leading to super
efficient and prompt service delivery.
So it's not just about scoring marks my
friend, it's about becoming genuinely
smarter and more organized in real life.
Break down off question types based on the
observation of past patterns in your exam.
Dear Friend, ranking and alphabet
test questions commonly appear in
a few distinct yet very interesting
flavors for ranking the lion's share.
About 30% of the questions is usually
dedicated to finding the total number
of persons in a row or a column.
This is quite a popular one.
Then comes finding position
from other end, which typically
accounts for a significant 25% of
the questions following closely.
Finding the number of persons between
two persons makes up another solid 20%,
and do be careful with the overlapping or
non-overlapping cases as they surprisingly
contribute about 15% to your score.
Now moving on to the alphabet test.
It's a slightly different ballgame
letter series or alphabetical order
questions typically hover around
5% and the ever challenging word
formation or pair formation questions
also contribute a similar 5%.
So as you can clearly see, it's a good
mix of question types, much like a
perfectly balanced Indian Tali offering.
A bit of everything.
Formulas and tricks now for the absolute
magic mantras, the secret formulas that
are guaranteed to save your precious
time and your day during the exam.
Pay close attention, my friend.
These are your golden tickets for
ranking formulas to calculate the
total persons in a row when the
position of just one person is clearly
given from both ends of the row.
It's a matter of simple logic.
My friend.
Total equals position from left,
plus position from right minus one.
Remember to subtract one
because you are inadvertently
counting that poor person twice.
Once from the left and
once from the right.
Now when positions of two
different persons are given.
And there are a certain number
of persons between them.
We have two distinct
scenarios, so stay sharp.
The non-overlapping case where the total
number of people is clearly greater
than the combined sum of the left
position, plus right position is quite
straightforwardly calculated as total
equals left position plus right position
plus number of persons between them.
It's like adding up blocks.
Simple enough, right?
But then my friend.
There's the slightly trickier overlapping
case where the total number of people
is less than the combined sum of
left position plus right position.
Here, the formula changes a bit
total equals left position plus
right position, minus number of
persons between them, plus two.
Alternatively, if you specifically want to
find the number of persons between them in
such an overlapping scenario, the formula
becomes number of persons between them.
Equals left position plus right
position minus total minus two.
Keep this particular one super handy.
It's a lifesaver for
position from other end.
To find position from right equals
total minus position from left plus one.
It's exactly like balancing
a simple equation in maths.
Just remember to add one back for
the person themselves because they
are part of the go and similarly.
Position from left equals total
minus position from right plus one.
See my friend.
Simple arithmetic and a dash of logic.
That's all it takes now
for the smart alphabet test
tricks, alphabetical positions.
My friends, it is absolutely essential
that you commit to memory the
alphabetical position of each and every
letter from A equals one B equals two.
All the way to zed equals 26.
A super smart trick, a jugar, if you
will, is to always use E-J-O-T-Y 5, 10,
15, 20, 25 as your quick reference point.
You can also use other mnemonics
like C-E-F-I-L-O-R-U-X, or even
learn the reverse positions.
It's like having your phone speed
dial for letters, opposite letters.
Do try to remember those cool
pairs of opposite letters,
like A ZBY, CX and so on.
A super quick way to verify if they are
indeed opposite is to check if the sum
of the alphabetical positions totals 27.
For example, A is one and Z is
26, so one plus 26 equals 27.
It's like they perfectly complete each
other, just like a hot cup of chai and
a crispy biscuit on a rainy evening.
Methods of solving.
So my curious friends, how do we
confidently tackle these challenging
beasties in the exam hall?
You ask simple.
We have a meticulously crafted battle plan
ready just for you for ranking problems.
First things first.
Always visualize the row or column.
Either mentally draw a clear picture,
or if you are like me and prefer
tangible aids, quickly draw a
simple line on your scratch pad to
visually represent the arrangement.
This simple act helps a lot, trust me.
On this one then meticulously
identify given information clearly.
Note down all the positions provided,
whether it's from the left, right,
top or bottom, and any other crucial
information about the total number of
people or who's comfortably sitting
between whom clarity is key Here.
Next, it's time to apply
the relevant formula.
Based on what exactly is given to
you and what needs to be found, just
intelligently select the appropriate
formula from our list of magic mantras.
No need to reinvent the wheel, and
this next point is absolutely crucial.
My friends always handle
overlapping cases with care.
If the sum of the positions from both
ends look suspiciously bigger than the
total number of people, then bingo, you've
got an overlapping case on your hands.
You absolutely must adjust your
calculations using the specific
overlapping formula we discussed.
Remember this, if the problem explicitly
asks for the minimum number of
people, then always, always, always
consider the overlapping scenario.
But if it's asking for the maximum
number, then of course confidently
go for the non-overlapping scenario.
Got it.
Finally simply deduce and calculate.
Just patiently substitute the given
values into your chosen formula
and perform the calculations.
Easy peasy lemon squeezy as they
say for alphabet test problems.
Always, always a good idea
to write down the alphabet.
If you ever feel a tiny bit unsure
about letter positions under the immense
exam pressure, just quickly scribble
down the entire English alphabet
from A to Z on your scratch pad.
There's absolutely no shame
in doing that, my friend.
It's being smart.
Then number the alphabet, assign numbers
from one to 26 to each letter to quickly
and accurately identify their positions.
This is like doing a proper
roll call for your letters.
Next, it's critical to
identify the pattern or.
For letter series questions,
truly stare at the letters,
analyze the gaps between them.
Is it plus two minus three, or check if
they are alternate letters, or perhaps
even in reverse alphabetical order.
Your mission is to find the hidden secret
code for word formation questions when
they hand you a jumble of letters and
challenge you to form meaningful words.
Just try to form as many
as you possibly can.
List out all possible combinations.
But please my friend, do not invent
new English words for the sake
of the exam pay very, very close
attention to directional counting.
Read the question extremely carefully.
Are they asking from the left
hand, from the right hand to the
left off or to the right off?
The specified direction matters a
lot, just like choosing the correct
left or right turn at a crossroads.
And finally, a quick check on case
sensitivity if applicable, though it's
quite rare in these competitive exams,
just be aware if differentiating between
uppercase and lowercase letters actually
matters for that particular question.
Usually it doesn't, but a
quick mental check won't hurt.
Will it?
Shortcuts and smart techniques array.
My friends who said we always
have to do things the hard way.
We, Indians are masters of Jugar and
we have some really smart techniques
and shortcuts up our sleeves too.
You know, drawing a line.
For simpler ranking problems quickly,
drawing a straight line and marking the
positions like L dash X dash r can often
be incredibly faster than trying to recall
a complex formula, especially for persons
between questions, visuals always, always
help the brain relative positioning.
Instead of getting bogged down with
exact ranks, simply focus on how people
are placed relative to each other.
For example, X is three places to
the left of Y. Just means x dash,
dash y, simple, effective, and
to the point, minimum or maximum.
This my friend, is a golden rule.
You must engrave in your mind
when the question asks for the
minimum total number of people.
Always, I repeat, always consider
the overlapping scenario, and when
they ask for the maximum total,
then of course confidently go
for the non-overlapping scenario.
This will save you fixed points in those
slightly more complex ranking puzzles.
Your first task should be to
identify the fixed points.
These are the people whose positions
are directly and unambiguously
stated from one end or the other.
Once you have these anchors,
you can then easily build the
entire arrangement around them.
It's like finding the foundation
before constructing a building,
E-J-O-T-Y, or C-E-F-I-L-O-R-U.
For alphabet test, quickly use
these brilliant omic devices.
They help you find approximate letter
positions in a Jiffy, and from there.
You just count a tiny bit forward or
backward for the precise position.
Super useful.
Trust me.
Visualize the alphabet.
For those alphabet serious questions.
Try to mentally or physically
skip letters as per the pattern
you've cleverly identified.
This little trick saves a lot of
precious time pair counting for questions
that slyly ask about pairs of letters
with as many letters between them in
the word as in the actual alphabet.
The best method is to
just physically count.
For example, in the word stream for the
letter S, you'd count S-T-U-V-W-X-Y-Z.
Through the word similarly for T,
you'd count T-U-V-W-X, Y, Z. Be
methodical and systematic, my friend,
and you won't miss a single pair.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
But my friends, please, please, please
don't fall into these very common traps.
These are the notorious GIA
that will surely cost you
valuable marks in your exam.
So listen carefully.
Off by one errors.
This without a doubt, is the
most common and frustrating
mistake in ranking problems.
It's usually forgetting to correctly
add or subtract one or two.
When you are calculating the total
or the number of persons between
others, this often happens because
you either mistakenly include or
wrongly exclude the very person
whose position is being considered.
Be super careful, my friend.
One small slip can mess up
your entire calculation.
Confusing left or right, misinterpreting
left of X or right of Y from the
perspective of the entire row versus
the individual's own perspective.
Always, always assume a standard
facing direction like everyone
in the row is facing north.
Keeping it simple helps a lot.
Overlapping versus non-overlapping.
Failing to correctly identify whether
the arrangement is an overlapping or
a non-overlapping case, leads directly
to applying the incorrect formula.
This is where a large number of friends
unfortunately lose marks, so pay
extra attention to this distinction.
Ignoring immediately treating axis to
the left of Y, the exact same way as axis
immediately to the left of Y. There's
a significant difference, much like the
difference between near and very near.
Always read the precise wording,
counting errors in alphabet, test
miscounting letters when you are
identifying patterns, oppositions,
especially when you have to jump letters.
It's a common blunder, so double
check your accounts with utmost care.
Meaningless words, trying
too hard to form a meaningful
word from a jumble of letters.
And then sadly, accepting a
non-existent word array, my friend.
Don't try to invent new English
words for the sake of the exam.
Always double check.
If you have any doubt though, you
won't have a dictionary in the exam.
So trust your vocabulary, case confusion.
Forgetting to consider both the
forward and backward directions.
When you are specifically asked to find
pairs of letters in a given word, you
absolutely need to check both ways.
Just like looking both sides of the
road very carefully before crossing.
W Edge Framework summary.
Let's quickly sum it up, my friend using
the Handy W Edge framework, it's like a
RapidFire revision before the final show.
So what are these topics precisely?
They are all about determining positions.
Totals or hidden patterns within linear
arrangements and alphabetical sequences.
Simple, isn't it?
And why do we diligently learn them?
You ask primarily to assess and sharpen
your logical reasoning, spatial awareness,
and overall data organization skills.
Very practical indeed.
When are they typically
applied in real life?
Whenever you find yourself needing
to arrange, sort or pinpoint specific
elements within any kind of sequence,
it's more common than you think.
Where are these concepts
commonly encountered?
Definitely in competitive exams,
of course, but also widely in
data management tasks, and even in
everyday queue management scenarios.
Who needs to grasp this knowledge?
Every exam, aspirant, keen data
processors, and fundamentally, anyone who
deals with ordered information in their
daily professional or personal life.
Basically, everyone needs to know this.
And how do you go about solving these
problems effectively by intelligently
applying specific formulas, by drawing
clear diagrams for better visualization,
and by meticulously counting each
element based on the given conditions.
There are no shortcuts to smart,
focused, hard work, my friend.
Fully worked out examples,
cello, my friends.
Let's dive into some
fully worked out examples.
Now this is where all our theory
meets practical application where
the rubber truly meets the road
and you see how it all works.
Let's go example, one ranking total
persons question in a row of friends.
ESH is 15th from the left end
and 20th from the right end.
How many friends are
there in the row options?
A 34 B, 35 C 36.
D 37.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Step-by-step solution.
Step one, identify the given information.
Rish position from the left equals 15 ish.
Position from the right equals 20.
Step two, determine
the applicable formula.
Since the position of one single person,
ESH is clearly given from both ends
of the row, the correct and applicable
formula to find the total number of
persons is total equals position from
left, plus position from right minus one.
So simple, right?
Step three, apply the formula
and calculate total equals 15
plus 20 minus one total equals
35 minus one total equals 34.
Correct answer is.
A 34, see my friend.
Simple calculation, clear
logic, and you have your answer.
Example two, ranking persons
between question in a row of 60.
Friends Ish's 25th from the left end.
What is Ish's position
from the right end options?
A 35th B 36th, C 37th, D 38th.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Step-by-step solution.
Step one, identify the given information.
Total friends in the row equals 60 esh
position from the left end equals 25.
Step two, determine the applicable
formula to find a person's
position from the other end.
When the total number of persons and
their position from one end are given
the formula is position from right equals
total minus position from left plus one.
It's like finding the balance.
Step three, apply the formula
and calculate position from right
equals 60 minus 25 plus one position
from right equals 35 plus one
position from right equals 36.
Correct answer is B 36.
Not too difficult at all, my friend.
Is it just a bit of logical thinking?
Example three alphabet
test letter pair formation.
Question, how many pairs of letters are
there in the word prepare, which have as
many letters between them in the word as
in the English alphabet series options?
A none.
B one, C 2D three understand the
question before moving to explanation.
Step-by-step solution.
Step one, write down the word
and number each letter according
to its alphabetical position.
This is your first smart.
P 16, R 18 E five P 16 A one R 18 E five.
Step two, check for pairs
diligently in the forward direction.
That is from left to right, be systematic.
Let's start with the first P 16.
From the first P 16, we carefully
count onwards, alphabetically,
17, 18, 19, and so on P to R 18.
Look closely.
There is exactly one letter.
R between p and r in the word itself.
And guess what?
In the actual English alphabet,
there is precisely one letter
Q between P and r. Bingo.
So PR is a valid pair.
Shabash P to E five.
No, this doesn't match
the alphabetical spacing.
P two P 16, no direct match here either.
Letters between them are RE, so.
Two letters in the word, but
zero in the alphabet for direct.
P two P. P two A, Nope, not a pair.
P two R 18.
The second R still no match.
Letters between them are REPA,
which is four letters in the word.
But only one in the alphabet.
P two E five.
The last E, not a pair.
Now let's move to the first R 18.
From the first R 18, counting
alphabetically, 19, 20, and so on.
R to E five.
No.
R to P 16.
R to a one.
No.
R to R. 18.
The second R. No match here.
Letters between them.
REPA.
So three letters in the word,
but zero in the alphabet.
R to E. Five.
The last E. No, next.
Consider the first E five from the first
E five, counting six, seven, and so on.
E two P 16.
No.
E two A one.
E two R 18.
No.
E two E. The last E. No.
Step three.
Now this is crucial, my friend.
Check for pairs carefully
in the backward direction.
That is from right to left.
Don't miss this.
Let's start from the last E five
on the right, from the last E
five, counting alphabetically,
backwards six, seven, and so on.
E to R 18.
No, E to a one.
No E to P 16.
No.
E two, E five.
The first E, no, E two R 18.
The first R, no, E two P 16.
The first P, now for the last R 18.
From the right, from the last R 18,
counting alphabetically backwards.
19, 20, and so on.
R to a one, no, R to P, 16.
No R to E. Five.
The first E, no, R to R. 18.
The first R, no R to P 16.
The first P. Finally, let's check A
one from A one counting forward in
the alphabet to match letters on.
Its left in the word.
2, 3, 4, 5. Ah, A to E.
Look at this my friend.
There are exactly three letters between
A and EBRE in the word, and guess what?
In the actual English alphabet,
there are also precisely three
letters, B, C, D, between A and E.
So a E is also a perfect pair.
Wonderful.
Step four, count the total
number of unique pairs found.
We diligently found two unique pairs.
My friend, PR and a e. Correct
answer is C two Shabash.
You are absolutely getting it now.
Keep up the great work.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.